---
title: "CMF 2.0"
author: Jean-Michel FRANCOIS
---

`@talend/react-cmf` has is two years old and now is the time to merge the first breaking changes of his life!

* [feat(CMF/TUI-305): omitCMFProps is the default](https://github.com/Talend/ui/pull/1854)
* [chore(CMF/TUI-271): extract router as cmfModule](https://github.com/Talend/ui/pull/1842)

## omitCMFProps is the default

This cmfConnect has been introduce in [#1749](https://github.com/Talend/ui/pull/1749) without breaking change to let component express what they needs.

If `true` it stops propagate all props to the connected component.
So it let you spread props without having tons of useless tools for the connected component like setState if you don t have any state to manage.

So as for CMF 2.0 this props become true by default which mean if you just do `cmfConnect()(MyComponent)` MyComponent will not receive `state`, `setState`, `getComponent`, ...

Please refer to the documentation of [cmfConnect](https://github.com/Talend/ui/tree/master/packages/cmf/src/cmfConnect.md)

## Welcome `@talend/react-cmf-router` !

We believe routing is a master piece of a Single Page App. `react-router` v3 has been shipped with cmf from the begining. It was nice to being able have routing from settings.

So why we want to remove it from `cmf` ? First because we think not all webapp should have a router or at least not built the way `react-router` is. We want more flexibility and less complexity.

So as for now we will have `@talend/react-cmf-router` v3 and soon v4 to let you use this great and famous library.

## Future plan

On feature side we will ship soon a `service` pattern to let you organize your code per feature.

`Selectors` will become first citizen in CMF because they are in redux the way to take data and build a prop.
